Perfect — this gives us a clear direction.

You’re basically building a multi-lingual trade document intelligence system that needs to extract domain-specific financial entities (InstrumentType, Product, Notional, Counterparties, etc.) from emails + structured and unstructured attachments.

Let’s go step-by-step on how to architect this system — both conceptually and technically.


---

🧭 1. Clarify the Objective

You’re aiming for Domain-Specific Entity Extraction (not generic NER).
The target output is structured trade metadata, e.g.:

{
  "InstrumentType": "Interest Rate Swap",
  "Product": "EUR 3M vs 6M",
  "Notional": "5,000,000 EUR",
  "Counterparty": "Bank of China",
  "TradeDate": "2025-11-10"
}

So you’re combining:

Semantic understanding (identify what is a “Notional”, “Product”)

Numerical pattern recognition

Multi-lingual text comprehension

Cross-document reasoning (sometimes info is split between email and attachment)



---

🧩 2. High-Level Architecture

Here’s a multi-stage pipeline that works well in your scenario:

Stage 1 – Data ingestion

Parse email + attachments.

Extract text with metadata (source, language, type).

OCR images or scanned PDFs.

Convert everything to clean plain text.


Stage 2 – Document classification (optional but powerful)

Classify document type:
e.g. Trade Confirmation, Amendment Notice, Deal Summary, Statement.

Helps choose the right extraction model downstream.


Model:
→ Fine-tune xlm-roberta-base or DeBERTa-multilingual on document-type classification.

Stage 3 – Entity Extraction

Here’s where your NER / Field Extraction happens.

There are two main strategies (you can even run them in hybrid mode):


---

🔍 3. Model Strategies

A. Token-based NER (classic approach)

Use a multilingual transformer fine-tuned on your labeled dataset.

Recommended Base Models

Model	Pros

xlm-roberta-large	Excellent multilingual performance, proven for NER
google/rembert	Deep multilingual coverage (110+ languages)
microsoft/deberta-v3-large-mnli	Great contextual understanding
Davlan/xlm-roberta-base-ner-hrl	Pre-finetuned for multilingual NER (great start)


Fine-tuning method:

Prepare annotated text with BIO tags (using Prodigy or Doccano)

Train with Hugging Face Trainer

Include multi-line samples in training.

Use sentencepiece tokenizer to handle multi-lingual tokenization.


Good for:

Consistent formats (emails, confirmations)

Repeatable fields (e.g., Notional, Counterparty)



---

B. Instruction-based extraction (LLM approach)

Use a multilingual LLM to directly extract structured fields from text.

Example prompt:

Extract the following fields: InstrumentType, Product, Notional, Counterparty, TradeDate.
Return as JSON.
Text:
<email + attachment content>

Recommended Models

Model	Size	Notes

Mixtral 8x7B or Mistral 7B Instruct	Strong multilingual support	
Llama 3.1 70B	Multilingual & domain adaptable	
Gemma 2 27B	Efficient, strong on text-to-JSON	
Flan-T5-XXL	Good for fine-tuning on structured output	
Claude 3.5 Sonnet or GPT-4o (API-based)	For production-grade multi-language reasoning	


For private deployment or fine-tuning, use open models (Mistral, Llama, Gemma).

Advantages:

Handles free-form text & multi-line entities.

No need for token-level labeling.

Easier to extend (just add new fields to prompt).


You can fine-tune these models on your domain data using LoRA / QLoRA to improve extraction accuracy.


---

🌐 4. Multilingual Handling

Here’s how to make it robust across English, Spanish, French, Arabic, Chinese, etc.:

1. Unified preprocessing

Detect language (fastText, langdetect).

Option 1: Route text to multilingual model directly (recommended).

Option 2: Translate to English before extraction (less accurate for financial terms).



2. Domain dictionary / gazetteer

Keep a list of domain-specific entities (e.g., “Interest Rate Swap”, “FX Forward”, “Option”, “Repo”).

Use it in post-processing to normalize outputs.





---

🧠 5. Hybrid Design (Best Practice)

For trade-related text, hybrid pipelines outperform pure ML:

Layer	Function

Rule-based Preprocessor	Regex for detecting numbers, currencies, date patterns
NER / LLM Extractor	Semantic extraction (fields, entity relations)
Post-processing Validator	Check consistency (e.g. Notional numeric format, counterparty lookup)


Example hybrid post-processing rule:

if "notional" in output:
    output["notional"] = normalize_currency(output["notional"])


---

🧰 6. Tools Stack Recommendation

Component	Tool / Library

Preprocessing	pdfplumber, PyMuPDF, pytesseract, langdetect
Annotation	Doccano, Prodigy, Label Studio
Model fine-tuning	Hugging Face Transformers, PEFT, LoRA
Deployment	FastAPI, LangChain, LLM inference server (vLLM, Ollama)
Evaluation	seqeval, spacy, jsondiff
Optional	Haystack for retrieval + extraction on large emails



---

⚙️ 7. Evaluation Strategy

You can define metrics per field:

Field	Metric

Notional	numeric match
InstrumentType	exact match
Product	fuzzy match
Counterparty	partial name match
All fields	JSON completeness score



---

🚀 8. Scaling Plan

1. Start with 1–2 languages (English + Spanish) → build baseline.


2. Add multilingual fine-tuning with small batches from other languages.


3. Add structured docs (PDF, Excel) → improve layout awareness (via LayoutLMv3 or OCR).


4. Add LLM fallback for edge cases / low-confidence predictions.




---

If you’d like, I can now help you design:

A reference pipeline architecture diagram, or

A model training setup (with dataset format, model configs, and fine-tuning script).


👉 Which one would you prefer next — architecture or model training design?

